content/docs/getting-started/hello-world.md, before:

---
title: "Hello World!"
weight : 1010
menu:
  docs:
    parent: getting_started
---

To kick off our tour of Tokio, we will start with the obligatory "hello world"
example. This program will create a TCP stream and write "hello, world!" to the stream.
The difference between this and a Rust program that writes to a TCP stream without Tokio
is that this program won't block program execution when the stream is created or when
our "hello, world!" message is written to the stream.

Before we begin you should have a very basic understanding of how TCP streams work. Having
an understanding of Rust’s [standard library implementation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/net/struct.TcpStream.html)
is also helpful.

Let's get started.

First, generate a new crate.

```bash
$ cargo new --bin hello-world
$ cd hello-world
```

Next, add the necessary dependencies in `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[dependencies]
tokio = "0.1"
```

and the crates and types into scope in `main.rs`:

```rust
# #![deny(deprecated)]
extern crate tokio;

use tokio::io;
use tokio::net::TcpStream;
use tokio::prelude::*;
# fn main() {}
```

# Creating the stream

The first step is to create the `TcpStream`. We use the `TcpStream` implementation provided
by Tokio.

```rust
# #![deny(deprecated)]
# extern crate tokio;
#
# use tokio::net::TcpStream;
fn main() {
    // Parse the address of whatever server we're talking to
    let addr = "127.0.0.1:6142".parse().unwrap();
    let stream = TcpStream::connect(&addr);

    // Following snippets come here...
}
```

Next, we define the `client` task. This asynchronous task will create the stream
and then yield the stream once it's been created for additional processing.

```rust
# #![deny(deprecated)]
# extern crate tokio;
#
# use tokio::net::TcpStream;
# use tokio::prelude::*;
# fn main() {
# let addr = "127.0.0.1:6142".parse().unwrap();
let hello_world = TcpStream::connect(&addr).and_then(|stream| {
    println!("created stream");

    // Process stream here.

    Ok(())
})
.map_err(|err| {
    // All tasks must have an `Error` type of `()`. This forces error
    // handling and helps avoid silencing failures.
    //
    // In our example, we are only going to log the error to STDOUT.
    println!("connection error = {:?}", err);
});
# }
```

The call to `listener.incoming()` returns a [`Stream`] of accepted connections.
We'll learn more about [`Stream`] later in the guide, but for now you can think of
a [`Stream`] as an asynchronous iterator. The `for_each` method yields new sockets
each time a socket is accepted. `for_each` is an example of a combinator function that
defines how asynchronous work will be processed.

Each combinator function takes ownership of necessary state as well as the
callback to perform and returns a new `Stream` or a `Future` that has the
additional "step" sequenced. A `Future` is a value representing some computation
that will complete at some point in the future.

It's worth reiterating that returned futures are lazy, i.e., no work is performed when
calling the combinator. Instead, once all the asynchronous steps are sequenced, the
final `Future` (representing the entire task) is "spawned" (i.e., run). This is when
the work that was previously defined starts getting run. In other words, the code
we've written so far does not actually create a TCP stream.

We will be digging more into futures (and the related concepts of streams and sinks)
later on.

It's also important to note that we've called `map_err` to convert whatever error
we may have gotten to `()` before we can actually run our future. This ensures that
we acknowledge errors.

Next, we will process the stream.

# Writing data

Our goal is to write `"hello world\n"` to the stream.

Going back to the `TcpStream::connect(addr).and_then` block:

```rust
# #![deny(deprecated)]
# extern crate tokio;
#
# use tokio::io;
# use tokio::prelude::*;
# use tokio::net::TcpStream;
# fn main() {
# let addr = "127.0.0.1:6142".parse().unwrap();
let client = TcpStream::connect(&addr).and_then(|stream| {
    println!("created stream");

    io::write_all(stream, "hello world\n").then(|result| {
      println!("wrote to stream; success={:?}", result.is_ok());
      Ok(())
    })
})
# ;
# }
```

The [`io::write_all`] function takes ownership of `stream`, returning a
[`Future`] that completes once the entire message has been written to the
stream. `then` is used to sequence a step that gets run once the write has
completed. In our example, we just write a message to `STDOUT` indicating that
the write has completed.

Note that `result` is a `Result` that contains the original stream. This allows us
to sequence additional reads or writes to the same stream. However, we have
nothing more to do, so we just drop the stream, which automatically closes it.

# Running the client task

So far we have a `Future` representing the work to be done by our program, but we
have not actually run it. We need a way to "spawn" that work. We need an executor.

Executors are responsible for scheduling asynchronous tasks, driving them to
completion. There are a number of executor implementations to choose from, each have
different pros and cons. In this example, we will use the default executor of the
[Tokio runtime][rt].

```rust
# #![deny(deprecated)]
# extern crate tokio;
# extern crate futures;
#
# use tokio::prelude::*;
# use futures::future;
# fn main() {
# let client = future::ok(());
println!("About to create the stream and write to it...");
tokio::run(client);
println!("Stream has been created and written to.");
# }
```

`tokio::run` starts the runtime, blocking the current thread until all spawned tasks
have completed and all resources (like files and sockets) have been dropped.

So far, we only have a single task running on the executor, so the `client` task
is the only one blocking `run` from returning. Once `run` has returned we can be sure
that our Future has been run to completion.

You can find the full example [here][full-code].

# Next steps

We've only dipped our toes into Tokio and its asynchronous model. The next page in
the guide, will start digging deeper into the Tokio runtime model.

[`Future`]: {{< api-url "futures" >}}/future/trait.Future.html
[rt]: {{< api-url "tokio" >}}/runtime/index.html
[`io::write_all`]: {{< api-url "tokio-io" >}}/io/fn.write_all.html
[full-code]:https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio/blob/master/examples/hello_world.rs

Commit message:

Smaller additions to the hello_world example (#233)
* Add paragraph elaborating on 'tokio::{io,net}'
* Add section to run the code

content/docs/getting-started/hello-world.md, after:

---
title: "Hello World!"
weight : 1010
menu:
  docs:
    parent: getting_started
---

To kick off our tour of Tokio, we will start with the obligatory "hello world"
example. This program will create a TCP stream and write "hello, world!" to the stream.
The difference between this and a Rust program that writes to a TCP stream without Tokio
is that this program won't block program execution when the stream is created or when
our "hello, world!" message is written to the stream.

Before we begin you should have a very basic understanding of how TCP streams work. Having
an understanding of Rust’s [standard library implementation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/net/struct.TcpStream.html)
is also helpful.

Let's get started.

First, generate a new crate.

```bash
$ cargo new --bin hello-world
$ cd hello-world
```

Next, add the necessary dependencies in `Cargo.toml`:

```toml
[dependencies]
tokio = "0.1"
```

and the crates and types into scope in `main.rs`:

```rust
# #![deny(deprecated)]
extern crate tokio;

use tokio::io;
use tokio::net::TcpStream;
use tokio::prelude::*;
# fn main() {}
```

Here we use Tokio's own [`io`] and [`net`] modules. These modules provide the same
abstractions over networking and I/O-operations as the corresponding modules in `std`
with a small difference; all actions are performed asynchronously.

# Creating the stream

The first step is to create the `TcpStream`. We use the `TcpStream` implementation provided
by Tokio.

```rust
# #![deny(deprecated)]
# extern crate tokio;
#
# use tokio::net::TcpStream;
fn main() {
    // Parse the address of whatever server we're talking to
    let addr = "127.0.0.1:6142".parse().unwrap();
    let stream = TcpStream::connect(&addr);

    // Following snippets come here...
}
```

Next, we define the `client` task. This asynchronous task will create the stream
and then yield the stream once it's been created for additional processing.

```rust
# #![deny(deprecated)]
# extern crate tokio;
#
# use tokio::net::TcpStream;
# use tokio::prelude::*;
# fn main() {
# let addr = "127.0.0.1:6142".parse().unwrap();
let hello_world = TcpStream::connect(&addr).and_then(|stream| {
    println!("created stream");

    // Process stream here.

    Ok(())
})
.map_err(|err| {
    // All tasks must have an `Error` type of `()`. This forces error
    // handling and helps avoid silencing failures.
    //
    // In our example, we are only going to log the error to STDOUT.
    println!("connection error = {:?}", err);
});
# }
```

The call to `listener.incoming()` returns a [`Stream`] of accepted connections.
We'll learn more about [`Stream`] later in the guide, but for now you can think of
a [`Stream`] as an asynchronous iterator. The `for_each` method yields new sockets
each time a socket is accepted. `for_each` is an example of a combinator function that
defines how asynchronous work will be processed.

Each combinator function takes ownership of necessary state as well as the
callback to perform and returns a new `Stream` or a `Future` that has the
additional "step" sequenced. A `Future` is a value representing some computation
that will complete at some point in the future.

It's worth reiterating that returned futures are lazy, i.e., no work is performed when
calling the combinator. Instead, once all the asynchronous steps are sequenced, the
final `Future` (representing the entire task) is "spawned" (i.e., run). This is when
the work that was previously defined starts getting run. In other words, the code
we've written so far does not actually create a TCP stream.

We will be digging more into futures (and the related concepts of streams and sinks)
later on.

It's also important to note that we've called `map_err` to convert whatever error
we may have gotten to `()` before we can actually run our future. This ensures that
we acknowledge errors.

Next, we will process the stream.

# Writing data

Our goal is to write `"hello world\n"` to the stream.

Going back to the `TcpStream::connect(addr).and_then` block:

```rust
# #![deny(deprecated)]
# extern crate tokio;
#
# use tokio::io;
# use tokio::prelude::*;
# use tokio::net::TcpStream;
# fn main() {
# let addr = "127.0.0.1:6142".parse().unwrap();
let client = TcpStream::connect(&addr).and_then(|stream| {
    println!("created stream");

    io::write_all(stream, "hello world\n").then(|result| {
      println!("wrote to stream; success={:?}", result.is_ok());
      Ok(())
    })
})
# ;
# }
```

The [`io::write_all`] function takes ownership of `stream`, returning a
[`Future`] that completes once the entire message has been written to the
stream. `then` is used to sequence a step that gets run once the write has
completed. In our example, we just write a message to `STDOUT` indicating that
the write has completed.

Note that `result` is a `Result` that contains the original stream. This allows us
to sequence additional reads or writes to the same stream. However, we have
nothing more to do, so we just drop the stream, which automatically closes it.

# Running the client task

So far we have a `Future` representing the work to be done by our program, but we
have not actually run it. We need a way to "spawn" that work. We need an executor.

Executors are responsible for scheduling asynchronous tasks, driving them to
completion. There are a number of executor implementations to choose from, each have
different pros and cons. In this example, we will use the default executor of the
[Tokio runtime][rt].

```rust
# #![deny(deprecated)]
# extern crate tokio;
# extern crate futures;
#
# use tokio::prelude::*;
# use futures::future;
# fn main() {
# let client = future::ok(());
println!("About to create the stream and write to it...");
tokio::run(client);
println!("Stream has been created and written to.");
# }
```

`tokio::run` starts the runtime, blocking the current thread until all spawned tasks
have completed and all resources (like files and sockets) have been dropped.

So far, we only have a single task running on the executor, so the `client` task
is the only one blocking `run` from returning. Once `run` has returned we can be sure
that our Future has been run to completion.

You can find the full example [here][full-code].

# Running the code

[Netcat] is a tool for quickly creating TCP sockets from the command line. The following
command starts a listening TCP socket on the previously specified port.

```bash
$ nc -l -p 6142
```

In a different terminal we'll run our project.

```bash
$ cargo run
```

If everything goes well, you should see `hello world` printed from Netcat.

# Next steps

We've only dipped our toes into Tokio and its asynchronous model. The next page in
the guide, will start digging deeper into the Tokio runtime model.

[`Future`]: {{< api-url "futures" >}}/future/trait.Future.html
[rt]: {{< api-url "tokio" >}}/runtime/index.html
[`io`]: {{< api-url "tokio" >}}/io/index.html
[`net`]: {{< api-url "tokio" >}}/net/index.html
[`io::write_all`]: {{< api-url "tokio-io" >}}/io/fn.write_all.html
[full-code]: https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio/blob/master/examples/hello_world.rs
[Netcat]: http://netcat.sourceforge.net/
