content/community.md, before:

+++
title = "The rav1e Community"
description = "Get help, discuss problems, and join the fun"
+++

# About

[AV1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AV1) is an open and royalty-free video coding format designed by the Alliance for Open Media, concurrent with [HEVC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HEVC) (H.265). AV1 enables to stream video content at a reduced bitrate without loss of visual quality.

[rav1e](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ytsRYKQc6kQ) is an encoder written in [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/), developped by [Mozilla](https://research.mozilla.org/av1-media-codecs/)/[Xiph](https://xiph.org/). As such, it takes an input video and encodes it to produce a valid AV1 bitstream.
# Communication

You can join us at #daala on Freenode Network in IRC. If you do not have IRC Set up, you can use from [web browser](http://webchat.freenode.net/?channels=%23daala), where you're welcome to ask any doubts related to Video Technology, follow our developments, report bugs related to rav1e and also av1, you also welcome to suggest any feature requests which you feel its worth.

You are encouraged to attend the weekly progress meetings by installing and using [Mumble](http://wiki.mumble.info/).

The address is `mf4.xiph.org` and the port is `64738`.

They occur on Tuesdays at [9 AM Pacific Time](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=Daala+Weekly+Meeting&iso=20190801T09&p1=1241). 

The meeting agenda can be found at this [Etherpad](https://public.etherpad-mozilla.org/p/daala-weekly-meeting).

# Issues

Currently we are using Github is used for tracking issues. The primary location for these is the main
[rav1e repository](https://github.com/xiph/rav1e/issues).

These repositories also contain milestones for upcoming *major* releases, which
are currently used to track breaking changes that might be considered for the
next major release. There are also some set of projects which are on progess you can track.

# Get Involved

Are you interested in getting involved with the code and participating in
our development? Join us over the IRC.

# Contributors

The development of rav1e would not be possible without help from volunteers around the [globe](https://github.com/xiph/rav1e/graphs/contributors).

Commit message:

content/community: Update the community

content/community.md, after:

+++
title = "The rust-av Community"
description = "Get help, discuss problems, and join the fun"
+++

# About

[Rust-av](https://github.com/rust-av) aims to be a complete multimedia toolkit written in rust.

**Rust** is a quite promising language that aims to offer high execution speed while granting a number of warranties on the code behavior that you cannot have in C, C++, Java and so on.

Its **zero-cost abstraction** feature coupled with the fact that the compiler actively **prevents** you from committing a large class of mistakes related to **memory access** seems a perfect match to implement a multimedia toolkit that is **easy to use, fast** enough and **trustworthy**.

# Why something completely new?

Since rust code can be intermixed with C code, an evolutive approach of replacing little by little small components in a larger project is perfectly feasible, and it is what we are currently trying to do with [vlc](http://dev.unhandledexpression.com/slides/rustconf-2016/vlc/).

But rust is not just good to write some inner routines so they are fast and correct, its [trait](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/second-edition/ch10-02-traits.html) system is also quite useful to have a more expressive API.

Most of the multimedia concepts are pretty simple at the high level (e.g frame is just a picture or some sound with some timestamp) with an excruciating amount of quirk and details that require your toolkit to make choices for you or make you face a large amount of complexity.

That leads to API that are either easy but quite inflexible (and opinionated) or API providing all the flexibility, but forcing the user to have to learn a lot of information in order to achieve what the simpler API would let you implement in an handful of lines of code.

# Projects

* matroska
* rust-av
* ffm2-rs
* rav1e 
* speexdsp-rs
* opus-rs
* av-vorbis
* ave
* vpx-rs
* dav1d-rs
* flavors

and [much more](https://github.com/rust-av).

# Get Involved

Are you interested in getting involved with the code and participating in
our development? 
Contact the team member [lu_zero](luca.barbato@luminem.it)

# Contributors

We would like to thank to numerous volunteers around the globe for helping rust-av grow :).
