content/docs/going-deeper/third-party.md, before:

+++
title = "Third-party crates"
description = ""
menu = "going_deeper"
weight = 109
+++

Currently the [`futures`], [`tokio-core`], [`tokio-service`], and [`tokio-proto`] crates provide
the foundation for the Tokio ecosystem. There's a growing set of crates outside
of Tokio itself, however, filling in more functionality!

* [`tokio-curl`] is an HTTP client library backed by the libcurl C library.
* [`tokio-timer`] is a timer library providing finer-grained control over timers
  and helpful timeout facilities over the types in [`tokio-core`].
* [`tokio-tls`] is a library for TLS streams backed by [`native-tls`].
* [`tokio-openssl`] is similar to [`tokio-tls`] but hardwired to OpenSSL.
* [`tokio-uds`] is a Unix library for supporting Unix Domain Sockets in the same
  way that `tokio_core::net` works with TCP sockets
* [`tokio-inotify`] enables the use of inotify file descriptors as a `Stream`.
* [`tokio-signal`] allows abstraction Unix signals as a `Stream`.
* [`tokio-process`] enables asynchronous process managment, both for child
  processes exiting as well as I/O pipes to children.
* [`trust-dns`] is an asynchronous DNS client and server, supporting features
  like DNSSec as well

[`futures`]: https://github.com/alexcrichton/futures-rs
[`tokio-core`]: https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio-core
[`tokio-service`]: https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio-service
[`tokio-proto`]: https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio-proto
[`tokio-curl`]: https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio-curl
[`tokio-timer`]: https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio-timer
[`tokio-tls`]: https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio-tls
[`tokio-openssl`]: https://github.com/alexcrichton/tokio-openssl
[`native-tls`]: https://github.com/sfackler/rust-native-tls
[`tokio-uds`]: https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio-uds
[`tokio-dns`]: https://github.com/sbstp/tokio-dns
[`tokio-inotify`]: https://github.com/dermesser/tokio-inotify
[`tokio-signal`]: https://github.com/alexcrichton/tokio-signal
[`tokio-process`]: https://github.com/alexcrichton/tokio-process
[`trust-dns`]: http://trust-dns.org/

Commit message:

Add a comment that third-party can expand

content/docs/going-deeper/third-party.md, after:

+++
title = "Third-party crates"
description = ""
menu = "going_deeper"
weight = 109
+++

Currently the [`futures`], [`tokio-core`], [`tokio-service`], and [`tokio-proto`] crates provide
the foundation for the Tokio ecosystem. There's a growing set of crates outside
of Tokio itself, however, filling in more functionality!

* [`tokio-curl`] is an HTTP client library backed by the libcurl C library.
* [`tokio-timer`] is a timer library providing finer-grained control over timers
  and helpful timeout facilities over the types in [`tokio-core`].
* [`tokio-tls`] is a library for TLS streams backed by [`native-tls`].
* [`tokio-openssl`] is similar to [`tokio-tls`] but hardwired to OpenSSL.
* [`tokio-uds`] is a Unix library for supporting Unix Domain Sockets in the same
  way that `tokio_core::net` works with TCP sockets
* [`tokio-inotify`] enables the use of inotify file descriptors as a `Stream`.
* [`tokio-signal`] allows abstraction Unix signals as a `Stream`.
* [`tokio-process`] enables asynchronous process managment, both for child
  processes exiting as well as I/O pipes to children.
* [`trust-dns`] is an asynchronous DNS client and server, supporting features
  like DNSSec as well

If you've got your own crate or know of others that should be present on this
list, please feel free to send a PR!

[`futures`]: https://github.com/alexcrichton/futures-rs
[`tokio-core`]: https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio-core
[`tokio-service`]: https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio-service
[`tokio-proto`]: https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio-proto
[`tokio-curl`]: https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio-curl
[`tokio-timer`]: https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio-timer
[`tokio-tls`]: https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio-tls
[`tokio-openssl`]: https://github.com/alexcrichton/tokio-openssl
[`native-tls`]: https://github.com/sfackler/rust-native-tls
[`tokio-uds`]: https://github.com/tokio-rs/tokio-uds
[`tokio-dns`]: https://github.com/sbstp/tokio-dns
[`tokio-inotify`]: https://github.com/dermesser/tokio-inotify
[`tokio-signal`]: https://github.com/alexcrichton/tokio-signal
[`tokio-process`]: https://github.com/alexcrichton/tokio-process
[`trust-dns`]: http://trust-dns.org/
